This article lists the performances of each of the national teams which have made at least one appearance in the FIFA World Cup.
As of the 2022 FIFA World Cup, 80 national teams have competed at the final tournaments. Brazil is the only team to have appeared in all 22 tournaments up to the 2022 edition, with Germany having participated in 20, Italy and Argentina in 18 and Mexico in 17. To date, eight nations have won the tournament. The inaugural winners in 1930 were Uruguay; the current champions are Argentina. The most successful nation in the competition are currently Brazil, who have won the cup on five occasions. Six teams have appeared in FIFA World Cup finals without winning, while twelve more have appeared in semi-finals.


Ranking of teams by number of appearances
As of 31 March 2026


Debut of national teams
Each successive World Cup has had at least one team appearing for the first time. Using FIFA's view on successor teams, the total number of teams that have participated in the World Cup up to and including the 2026 edition is 84.


Overall team records
The system used in the World Cup up to 1990 was 2 points for a win. In this ranking 3 points are awarded for a win, 1 for a draw and 0 for a loss. As per statistical convention in football, matches decided in extra time are counted as wins and losses, while matches decided by penalty shoot-outs are counted as draws. Teams are ranked by total points, then by goal difference, then by goals scored.

As of 2022 FIFA World Cup

Breakdown of successor team records


Medal table

Note: Czechia and Slovakia won medals as Czechoslovakia.


Comprehensive team results by tournament
The team ranking in each tournament is according to FIFA. The rankings, apart from the top four positions (top two in 1930), are not a result of direct competition between the teams; instead, teams eliminated in the same round are ranked by their full results in the tournament.
For each tournament, the number of teams in each finals tournament are shown (in parentheses).

Legend


Hosts


Results of defending finalists
The defending World Cup champions were formerly granted an automatic spot in the Cup finals field. This berth is no longer guaranteed since the 2006 tournament.. However, no defending World Cup champion has yet failed to qualify.
Automatic berths have never been given for defending World Cup runners-up. Defending runners-up have qualified 17 times in 21 attempts for the following World Cup.


Results by confederation
   — Hosts are from this confederation


Overview


AFC


CAF


CONCACAF


CONMEBOL


OFC


UEFA


Overall


Droughts
This section is a list of droughts associated with the participation of national football teams in the FIFA World Cups. 1942 and 1946, when the tournament was not held due to World War II, are not included in the calculation of a drought.


Active World Cup appearance droughts
Does not include teams that have not yet made their first appearance or teams that no longer exist.

As of 31 March 2026


Longest World Cup appearance droughts overall
This is a list of the longest droughts between World Cup appearances. 
Only includes droughts begun after a team's first appearance until the team ceased to exist.

As of 31 March 2026


See also
AFC Asian Cup records and statistics
Africa Cup of Nations records and statistics
CONCACAF Gold Cup records and statistics
Copa América records and statistics
FIFA Arab Cup records and statistics
FIFA Beach Soccer World Cup records and statistics
FIFA U-17 World Cup records and statistics
FIFA U-20 World Cup records and statistics
FIFA Confederations Cup records and statistics
FIFA Futsal World Cup
FIFA Women's World Cup records and statistics
Men's Olympic football tournament records and statistics
OFC Nations Cup records and statistics
UEFA European Championship records and statistics
Women's Olympic football tournament records and statistics


Notes


References